Two dataset of gene expressions

1. The leukemia dataset is described in the recent paper of Golub el al. [17]. This dataset comes from a study of gene ex-
pression in two types of acute leukemias: acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Gene expression levels were measured using Aymetrix high-
density oligonucleotide arrays containing p = 6817 human genes. The data comprise 47
cases of ALL (38 B-cell ALL and 9 T-cell ALL) and 25 cases of AML.
The following pre-processing steps were applied:
(i) thresholding: floor of 100 and ceiling of 16,000; (ii) filtering: exclusion of genes with
max / min <= 5 and (max?min) <= 500, where max and min refer respectively to the maxi-
mum and minimum expression levels of a particular gene across mRNA samples; (iii) base
10 logarithmic transformation.
The data are then summarized by a 723571 matrix X = (xij), where xij denotes the base
10 logarithm of the expression level for gene j in mRNA sample i.

The preprocessing is described in attached article

Dudoit "Comparison of Discrimination Methods for the
Classiffcation of Tumors Using Gene Expression Data"   (attached)

It is good also to standardize the values (Dudoit):
4.3 Standardization
It is common practice to use the correlation between the gene expression proles of two
mRNA samples to measure their similarity [2, 23, 26] . Consequently, we standardize the
observations (arrays) to have mean 0 and variance 1 across variables (genes). With the data
standardized in this fashion, the distance between two mRNA samples may be measured by
their Euclidean distance.

2. Second dataset:
The preprocessing is described in attached article !!!Valentini_2006.pdf (attached)
Here the samples were normalized.

 The data we used have been downloaded from the MIT Whitehead Institute.
We applied the proposed stability indices to a set of gene expression tumor
specimens from 58 diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and 19 follicular
lymphoma (FL) patients [11]. For each patient, expression levels of 7129
genes or EST sequences are provided from Affymetrix HU6800 oligonucleotide
arrays. Raw data have been pre-processed and re-scaled according to the procedures
described in [11]. In particular we processed the raw expression values
in Affymetrix’s scaled average difference units generated by Affymetrix’s
GeneChip software using a ”windowsizing” procedure for ceiling all the values
above the 16000 units and to set a lower threshold at 20 units to minimize
fluorescence saturation of the scanner and noise effects. Then the expression
values underwent a double filter to exclude all genes with a fold-change less
than 3-fold variation or with absolute variation less than 100 units. The 6286
genes that passed the double filter have been normalized with respect to their
mean and standard deviation (per sample).
11. M. Shipp, K. Ross, P. Tamayo, A.Weng, J. Kutok, R. Aguiar, M. Gaasenbeek,
M. Angelo, M. Reich, G. Pinkus, T. Ray, M. Koval, K. Last, A. Norton,
T. Lister, J. Mesirov, D. Neuberg, E. Lander, J. Aster, and T. Golub.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma outcome prediction by gene-expression
profiling and supervised machine learning. Nature Medicine, 8(1):68–74,
2002.

2a. The same disease:
Dudoit "Comparison of Discrimination Methods for the
Classiffcation of Tumors Using Gene Expression Data"

This dataset comes from a study of gene expression in the three most prevalent adult
lymphoid malignancies: B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), follicular lymphoma
(FL), and diuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) (Alizadeh et al. [2],
http://genome-www.stanford.edu/lymphoma). Gene expression levels were measured us-
ing a specialized cDNA microarray, the Lymphochip, containing genes that are preferentially
expressed in lymphoid cells or which are of known immunological or oncological importance.
In each microarray experiment, fluorescent cDNA targets were prepared from an experimen-
tal mRNA sample (red-fluorescent dye Cy5) and a reference mRNA sample derived from a
pool of 9 dierent lymphoma cell lines (green-fluorescent dye Cy3). This study produced
gene expression data for p = 4; 682 genes in n = 81 mRNA samples. The mRNA samples
comprise 29 cases of B-CLL (class 1), 9 cases of FL (class 2), and 43 cases of DLBCL (class
3). The data are collected into an 81 4682 matrix X = (xij), where xij denotes the base 2
logarithm of the Cy5/Cy3 fluorescence ratio for gene j in mRNA sample i. Figure 1 displays
images of the 8181 correlation matrix between gene expression proles for the 81 tumors.
As demonstrated by Alizadeh et al. [2], the DLBCL class is heterogeneous and comprises two
distinct subclasses with dierent clinical behaviors. However, it is nonetheless distinct from
the other two classes, B-CLL and FL, and in Section 6 we compare the ability of dierent
discrimination methods to distinguish between these three classes.
[2] A. A. Alizadeh, M. B. Eisen, R. E. Davis, C. Ma, I. S. Lossos, A. Rosenwald, J. C.
Boldrick, H. Sabet, T. Tran, X. Yu, J. I. Powell, L. Yang, G. E. Marti, T. Moore,
J. Hudson Jr, L. Lu, D. B. Lewis, R. Tibshirani, G. Sherlock, W. C. Chan, T. C.
Greiner, D. D. Weisenburger, J. O. Armitage, R. Warnke, R. Levy, W. Wilson, M. R.
Grever, J. C. Byrd, D. Botstein, P. O. Brown, and L. M. Staudt. Dierent types of
diuse large b-cell lymphoma identied by gene expression proling. Nature, 403:503{
511, 2000.

3. Valentini 
Lung cancer dataset (not normalized) - must be normalized per sample.
The lung tumor data set [8] collects 203 histologically defined specimens: 186
lung tumors, subdivided in 139 lung adenocarcinoma (AD), 21 squamous cell
lung adenocarcinoma (SQ), 20 pulmonary carcinoids (COID), 6 small-cell lung
adenocarcinoma (SMCL) and 17 normal lung (NL) specimens [8]. Each U95A
Affymetrix oligonucleotide array provides the gene expression levels of 12600
genes.
From the 12600 original genes of the U95A Affymetrix oligonucleotide array
3312 passed the filter (genes with standard deviation units less than 50 have
been excluded), according to the procedures described in [8] and then the gene
expression levels have been normalized with respect to the mean and standard
deviation. We implemented the pre-processing procedures with R scripts.
A. Bhattacharjee, W.G. Richards, J. Staunton, C. Li, S. Monti, P. Vasa,
C. Ladd, J. Beheshti, R. Bueno, M. Gillette, M. Loda, G.Weber, E.J. Mark,
E.S. Lander, W. Wong, B.E. Johnson, T.R. Golub, D.J. Sugarbaker, and
M. Meyerson. Classification of human lung carcinoma by mRNA expression
profiling reveals distinct adenocarcinoma subclasses. PNAS, 98(24):13790–
13795, 2001.

3. Colon cancer
Ben-Dor - Tissue Classification with Gene Expression Profiles

Colon cancer data set. This data set is a collection of expression measurements from colon
biopsy samples reported by Alon et al. (1999). The data set consists of 62 samples of colon
epithelial cells. These samples were collected from colon-cancer patients. The “tumor” biopsies
were collected from tumors, and the “normal” biopsies were collected from healthy parts of the
colons of the same patients. The final assignments of the status of biopsy samples were made by
pathological examination.
Gene expression levels in these 62 samples were measured using high density oligonucleotide
arrays. Of the O<O~2~2genes represented in these arrays, 2000 genes were selected based on the
confidence in the measured expression levels. The data, 62 samples over 2000 genes is available
at http://www.molbio.princeton.edu/colondata.
Alon, U., Barkai, N., Notterman, D., Gish, K., Ybarra, S., Mack, D. & Levine, A. J. (1999), ‘Broad
patterns of gene expression revealed by clustering analysis of tumor and normal colon tissues
probed by oligonucleotide arrays’, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 6745–6750.

aa